# How to get hired as a software developer.

Getting into the tech industry as a programmer can be a challenging and exciting journey. With ever-evolving technology and high demand for skilled developers, the tech industry offers ample opportunities for growth and success. To help aspiring programmers navigate this path, here is a not at all comprehensive guide on how to make that happen.  There are only two key things you need to focus on: that's it, only two. These two things are incredibly important though. As in, cannot be skipped important. It's the dual secret sauce for finding your software development job. I'm talking about networking and skills. Build a network and develop your skills and you'll find an opportunity. I've never seen someone have both things and NOT get an opportunity. In this blog, we'll discuss how to achieve these things. Regardless of background or signal, you'll need both skills and a network.

# Build a network.

Networking is necessary in many industries and the tech industry is no exception. You'll need to begin networking long before you need the network to get interviews so the quicker you get started on this the better off you'll be and the faster you might get qa referral. Obtaining a referral greatly increases your chances of getting an interview. Even if you don't get a referral, you'll gain knowledge from other developers and possibly insight as to who is hiring that you otherwise might have missed. If developers know you, they're more likely to mention your name if someone is looking for your given skill set. This can potentially lead to skipping some of the interview steps altogether.

**Here are a few ways to build your network:**

Attend Meetups: Meetups are a great way to meet people who are interested in the same technologies as you. Find local meetups in your area or attend online meetups to network with other developers. Check out meetup.com if you're unsure of what's available near you. You'll probably not have a lot to talk about if you're newer to programming but that's doesn't matter. Meeting people is the point. Listen to them and ask questions. Attend these events now so that when you have the skills, you'll already be able to ask them for referrals.

Engage in social media: Social media platforms like LinkedIn and Twitter are great tools for networking but engagement here is key. Connect with people in the industry by engaging with their posts. If the post been helpful to you, mention that. If the post taught you something new, let them know. Also share your own content. Join Slack and Discord groups centered around programming or specific tech stacks. Engage in conversations, share your thoughts, and ask questions. This is a great way to connect with others and learn more about the industry. I recommend following industry leaders and influencers. This will introduce you to the community and language of technologists you're wanting to work around. Make sure to interact with others and to share their posts. Most of the people sharing will appreciate the exposure. The idea is to build relationships, but you'll be learning as well. On most of these platforms it's a good idea to share your work as well, share your personal projects, code snippets, or articles you've written. An easy way to not run out of content is to simply share interesting things as you learn them. This can help you get feedback on your work, and it also shows your passion and dedication to the industry.

Attend social media based events. Many events in the tech industry are now held online, and social media is a great way to find and attend these events. Follow the right hashtags or accounts to find out about events like Twitter chats or Twitch live streams and participate in these events to connect with others. One such event is the monthly iOS Dev Happy Hour which originated on Twitter and often hosts a couple hundred iOS developers (https://www.iosdevhappyhour.com).

On LinkedIn follow industries that interest you. Not only will it give you an edge in your interview, but your potential employer will also most likely check your LinkedIn. This will indicate your interest in the industry.

Direct message people in the tech community. Don't be afraid to reach out to people directly on these social media platforms. If you find someone whose work you admire or who you want to connect with, send them a direct message introducing yourself and asking if they would be open to connecting. You would be surprised how often folks might respond if you've asked a thoughtful question or given a genuine compliment.

Open-Source Projects: Contributing to open-source projects can help you build relationships with other developers and gain real-world experience. There are many projects hosted on Bitbucket, GitHub, Gitlab and others who are looking for contributors. Check out the GitHub docs offering advice on how to contribute, https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/exploring-projects-on-github/finding-ways-to-contribute-to-open-source-on-github. You can even contribute directly to languages such as Python and Swift.

Conferences: Attending conferences and workshops can help you meet other developers, learn about new technologies, and get feedback on your work. Many well-known leaders within software development communities speak at these events so it's a great time to introduce yourself and possibly meet a highly experienced developer you otherwise wouldn't. Examples are Worldwide Developer conference by Apple (https://developer.apple.com/wwdc22/), Microsoft's Ignite, Open-Source Summit (https://events.linuxfoundation.org/open-source-summit-north-america/), and Pycon (https://pycon.org).

# Develop your Skills.

After you've started networking it's time to get to work. Software development is a high paying skill and programming is foundation of that. To be successful in the tech industry, you need to have a strong foundation in programming. So, developing your skills is essential to becoming a successful software developer.

**Here are a few ways to develop your programming skills:**

Number one rule, the more you practice coding, the better you will get at it, so always be building. Hands on your keyboard, building. No amount of theory will do it for you. You must take action and code. As you learn remember that the time you spend coding is where most your learning will take place. It's easy to get stuck trying to find the perfect stack to learn or book or course. Instead place an emphasis on getting your hands on your keyboard. Participate in coding challenges, hackathons, or build personal projects to get hands-on experience. Remember the open source mentioned earlier, get involved so that you're networking and building simultaneously.

Pair Program: Find someone who will pair program with you. The idea is simple, you want to program in front of someone who can help you if you get stuck. Preferably they should be more advanced in skill. I recommend programming problems that allow you to develop problem solving skills. Having a shorter feedback loop will accelerate your learning. Learning to solve problems and articulate what you're doing as you program will prepare you for interviewing. I recommend programming problems rather than project building for this time because the problems you face while building applications can be answered asynchronously more easily on social media or slack or wherever you're developing your network. Getting immediate feedback when you don't understand something can be a tremendous benefit. You'll avoid the time waste of googling, and you'll solidify concepts much quicker. Most of programming is individually done however this can be a great way accelerate your learning.  

Read and write: Read blogs, articles, and books on programming and technology. Writing about your experiences and what you've learned can help you better understand and remember the concepts you've learned. Take the time to read from experts and think about the technology you're using. With enough writing you'll build a personal brand. This isn't necessary and it can be helpful to be able to share with your interviewer. 

Subscribe to blogs and podcasts about programming. Immerse yourself in the subject matter so that you can easily talk about it when asked. There is lots of jargon in the tech industry so listening to others casually talk about the subject can help to demystify concepts.

Collaborate with others: Working with other developers can help you learn new skills and get feedback on your work. From your network find people who might want to build an application with you. Ask them to commit some small amount of time to meet weekly or bi-weekly at the least. This will give you an idea what it's like to be a part of a developer team.

Follow Tutorials: Find tutorials that build applications in the stack you're learning. You'll find many free options throughout the internet. Start there and then moved to paid quality material such as our own Big Nerd Ranch books and courses. Follow the tutorials through to get an understanding. Afterwards do them again but try to change some things as you go to make the application as different from the original as you can. Don't allow yourself to become too comfortable with these tutorials though. Its easy to develop the habit of only following explicit steps. You want to move into building your own versions of these applications as soon as possible.

Documentation: As you build, you'll rely on what other programmers have built by reading documentation. That's how youll come to understand how to use the libraries, just packages of code that do things for you, that are available within your chosen tech stack.

# In Summary

Getting into the tech industry as a programmer requires a combination of networking and developing your programming skills. Building relationships with people in the industry and staying up to date with the latest technologies will help you achieve your goal of becoming a successful programmer. Start networking and practicing coding today and take the first step towards your tech industry career.

Rick Wolter